They came to the people.
Many people perished that day, when a living torrent of gigantic rats - bigger than had ever been
seen at either the stations or in the tunnels - had flooded through the cordons and the station, burying all
of its defenders and its population, muffling their dying screams with the mass of its bodies.
Consuming everything in their path - the living, the dead, and their own fallen comrades - the rats tore
ahead, further and further, blindly, inexorably, propelled by a force beyond human comprehension.
Only a few men remained alive. No women, no old men or children - none of the people who
would normally have been saved first, but rather five healthy men who had managed to keep ahead of
the death-wreaking torrent. And the only reason they‟d outrun it was because they‟d happened to be
standing near a trolley, on watch in the southern tunnel. Hearing the shouts from the station, one of
them sprinted to see what had happened. Timiryazevskaya was already perishing when he caught sight
of it as he entered the station. At the station‟s entrance, he understood what had happened from the first
rivulets of rats seeping onto the platform and he was about to turn back, knowing that he couldn‟t
possibly help those who were defending the station, when suddenly his hand was seized from behind.
He turned around and a woman, her face contorted with horror, pulling insistently at his sleeve,
shouted, in an effort to overcome the many-voiced choir of despair, „Save him, soldier! Have mercy!‟
He saw that she was handing him a child‟s hand, a small, chubby hand, and he grabbed the hand
without even thinking that he was saving someone‟s life. And, pulling the child behind him and then
picking him up and tucking him under his arm, he raced off with the frontrunner rats in a race with
death - forward through the tunnel, where the trolley was waiting with his fellow patrolmen. He started
to shout at them from afar, from a distance of fifty metres or so, telling them to start up the trolley.
Their trolley was motorized, the only one of its kind in the surrounding ten stations, and it was only
because of it that they were able to outrun the rats. The patrolmen raced forward, and flew through the
abandoned station of Dmitrovskaya at full speed, where a few hermits had sought shelter, just
managing to shout to them: „Run! Rats!‟ (Without realizing that there was no chance of the hermits
saving themselves.) As they approached the cordons of Savyolovskaya (with whom, thank God, they
had peaceful arrangements), they slowed down so they wouldn‟t be fired at. They would have been
taken for raiders at such high speed. And they shouted at the top of their lungs to the guards, „Rats! The
rats are coming!‟ They were prepared to keep running right through Savyolovskaya, and further along
the line, prepared to beg to be let through, as long as there was somewhere further to go, as long as the
grey lava hadn‟t inundated the entire metro.
But luckily, there was something at Savyolovskaya that would save them, the station and perhaps
the entire Serpukhovsko-Timiryazevskaya branch. They were nearly at the station, soaked in sweat,
shouting at the Savyolovskaya guards about their narrow escape from death. Meanwhile, the guards at
the post were quickly pulling the cover off of some kind of impressive-looking piece of kit.
It was a flame-thrower, assembled by the local craftsmen from spare parts - homemade, but
incredibly powerful. When the first ranks of rats became visible, gathering force, and you could hear
the rustling and the scratching of a thousand rats‟ paws from the darkness, the guards fired up the
flame-thrower. And they didn‟t turn it off until the fuel was spent. A howling orange flame filled the
tunnel for tens of metres and burned the rats, burned them all, without stopping, for ten, fifteen, twenty
minutes. The tunnel was filled with the repulsive stench of burnt flesh and the wild screeching of rats.
And behind the guards of Savyolovskaya, who had become heroes and had earned fame along the
entire metro line, the trolley came to a stop, cooling down. On it were the five men who had fled from
Timiryazevskaya station, and there was one more - the child they had saved. A boy. Artyom